Computers use a lot of
encryption algorithms to send
and store information online.
They're all helpful
when it comes to hiding
private information, but only
as long as their
keys are protected.
Can you imagine having to keep
track of the encryption
keys protecting
all of your personal information
online? Neither can I,
and we don't have to, thanks
to something known
as public key infrastructure.
Public key
infrastructure, or PKI,
is an encryption framework that
secures the exchange of
information online.
It's a broad system
that makes accessing
information fast,
easy, and secure.
So, how does it all work?
PKI is a two-step process.
It all starts with the exchange
of encrypted information.
This involves either
asymmetric encryption,
symmetric encryption, or both.
Asymmetric encryption
involves the use of
a public and private key pair
for encryption and
decryption of data.
Let's imagine this as a box that
can be opened with two keys.
One key, the public key,
can only be used to access
the slot and add
items to the box.
Since the public key can't
be used to remove items,
it can be copied and
shared with people
all around the
world to add items.
On the other hand, the
second key, the private key,
opens the box fully, so that
the items inside can be removed.
Only the owner of the box has
access to the private
key that unlocks it.
Using a public key allows
the people and servers
you're communicating with
to see and send you
encrypted information
that only you
can decrypt with
your private key.
This two-key system makes
asymmetric encryption
a secure way
to exchange information online;
however, it also slows
down the process.
Symmetric encryption,
on the other hand,
is a faster and simpler
approach to key management.
Symmetric encryption
involves the use of
a single secret key to
exchange information.
Let's imagine the
locked box again.
Instead of two keys,
symmetric encryption
uses the same key.
The owner can use it to
open the box, add items,
and close it again. When they
want to share access,
they can give the secret key to
anyone else to do the same.
Exchanging a single secret key
may make web
communications faster,
but it also makes
it less secure.
PKI uses both asymmetric
and symmetric encryption,
sometimes in conjunction
with one another.
It all depends on whether speed
or security is the priority.
For example, mobile
chat applications
use asymmetric encryption to
establish a connection
between people at
the start of a conversation
when security is the priority.
Afterwards, when the speed of
communications back-and-forth
is the priority,
symmetric encryption takes over.
While both have their own
strengths and weaknesses,
they share a common
vulnerability,
establishing trust between
the sender and receiver.
Both processes rely
on sharing keys that
can be misused, lost, or stolen.
This isn't a problem when we
exchange information
in person because
we can use our senses to
tell the difference between
those we trust and
those we don't trust.
Computers, on the other hand,
aren't naturally equipped
to make this distinction.
That's where the second
step of PKI applies.
PKI addresses the vulnerability
of key sharing by establishing
trust using a system of
digital certificates between
computers and networks.
A digital certificate
is a file that
verifies the identity
of a public key holder.
Most online information is
exchanged using
digital certificates.
Users, companies, and
networks hold one
and exchange them
when communicating
information online
as a way of signaling trust.
Let's look at an example of how
digital certificates
are created.
Let's say an online
business is about to launch
their website, and they want to
obtain a digital certificate.
When they register
their domain,
the hosting company sends
certain information over
to a trusted certificate
authority, or CA.
The information provided is
usually basic things like
the company name and the country
where its headquarters
are located.
A public key for the
site is also provided.
The certificate
authority then uses
this data to verify the
company's identity.
When it's confirmed, the CA
encrypts the data with
its own private key.
Finally, they create
a digital certificate
that contains the
encrypted company data.
It also contains CA's
digital signature
to prove that it's authentic.
Digital certificates are a
lot like a digital ID badge
that's used online
to restrict or
grant access to information.
This is how PKI solves
the trust issue.
Combined with asymmetric and
symmetric encryption,
this two-step approach
to exchanging
secure information between
trusted sources is
what makes PKI such a
useful security control.